1. ls – List directory contents
Description: Lists files and directories in the current directory.
Example: ls -l (Shows detailed information like permissions, owner, size, etc.)

2. cd – Change directory
Description: Changes the current working directory.
Example: cd /home/user/Documents (Moves to the specified directory)

3. pwd – Print working directory
Description: Displays the full path of the current directory.
Example: pwd (Outputs something like /home/user)

4. mkdir – Make directories
Description: Creates a new directory.
Example: mkdir new_folder (Creates a new directory named new_folder)

5. rm – Remove files or directories
Description: Deletes files or directories.
Example: rm file.txt (Deletes file.txt), rm -r folder/ (Recursively deletes folder and its contents)

6. cp – Copy files or directories
Description: Copies files or directories from one location to another.
Example: cp source.txt destination.txt (Copies source.txt to destination.txt)

7. mv – Move or rename files or directories
Description: Moves files or directories, or renames them.
Example: mv old_name.txt new_name.txt (Renames old_name.txt to new_name.txt)

8. touch – Change file timestamps or create empty files
Description: Updates the timestamp of a file or creates a new empty file if it doesn't exist.
Example: touch newfile.txt (Creates newfile.txt if it doesn't exist)

9. cat – Concatenate and display files
Description: Displays the content of a file.
Example: cat file.txt (Shows the content of file.txt)

10. echo – Display a line of text
Description: Prints text or variables to the terminal.
Example: echo "Hello World" (Outputs Hello World)

11. man – Display manual pages
Description: Shows the manual (help) page for a command.
Example: man ls (Shows the manual page for the ls command)

12. chmod – Change file modes or permissions
Description: Modifies the permissions of a file or directory.
Example: chmod 755 file.sh (Gives the owner full permissions and others read-execute permissions)

13. chown – Change file owner and group
Description: Changes the ownership of a file or directory.
Example: chown user:group file.txt (Changes ownership of file.txt to user and group)

14. df – Report file system disk space usage
Description: Shows disk space usage for mounted filesystems.
Example: df -h (Shows disk usage in a human-readable format)

15. du – Estimate file space usage
Description: Shows disk usage for files and directories.
Example: du -sh * (Shows the size of each item in the current directory)

16. top – Display tasks and system resources
Description: Displays the running processes and resource usage.
Example: top (Shows CPU and memory usage, process list, etc.)

17. ps – Report process status
Description: Displays information about running processes.
Example: ps aux (Shows a detailed list of all running processes)

18. kill – Terminate processes
Description: Sends a signal to a process, typically used to terminate it.
Example: kill 1234 (Kills process with PID 1234)

19. grep – Search text using patterns
Description: Searches for a specific pattern in files or input.
Example: grep "hello" file.txt (Searches for the word hello in file.txt)

20. find – Search for files in a directory hierarchy
Description: Searches for files and directories within a specified location.
Example: find /home/user/ -name "*.txt" (Finds all .txt files in /home/user/)

21. tar – Archive files
Description: Used to create and extract archive files (commonly .tar, .tar.gz, or .tar.bz2).
Example: tar -cvf archive.tar folder/ (Creates an archive of the folder directory)

22. wget – Non-interactive network downloader
Description: Downloads files from the web.
Example: wget http://example.com/file.zip (Downloads file.zip from the given URL)

23. curl – Transfer data from or to a server
Description: Sends HTTP requests and handles responses.
Example: curl -O http://example.com/file.zip (Downloads a file)

24. sudo – Execute a command as another user (usually root)
Description: Allows a permitted user to execute commands as the superuser or another user.
Example: sudo apt update (Runs apt update with root privileges)

25. apt – Advanced Package Tool (for Debian-based distributions)
Description: Manages packages (install, update, remove) on systems like Ubuntu.
Example: sudo apt install vim (Installs the Vim editor)

26. yum – Package manager (for Red Hat-based distributions)
Description: Manages packages (install, update, remove) on systems like CentOS and RHEL.
Example: sudo yum install httpd (Installs the Apache HTTP server)

27. nano – Text editor
Description: A command-line text editor.
Example: nano file.txt (Edits file.txt in the nano editor)

28. vim – Text editor
Description: A powerful command-line text editor.
Example: vim file.txt (Edits file.txt in the vim editor)

29. history – Show command history
Description: Displays the list of previously executed commands.
Example: history (Shows the command history)

30. alias – Create an alias for a command
Description: Defines a shortcut for a command.
Example: alias ll='ls -l' (Creates an alias ll for ls -l)

31. hostname – Show or set the system’s hostname
Description: Displays or sets the name of the system.
Example: hostname (Shows the current hostname)

32. shutdown – Shut down the system
Description: Shuts down or reboots the system.
Example: sudo shutdown -h now (Shuts down the system immediately)

33. reboot – Reboot the system
Description: Reboots the system.
Example: sudo reboot (Reboots the system)

34. useradd – Add a new user
Description: Creates a new user account.
Example: sudo useradd newuser (Creates a new user named newuser)

35. passwd – Change user password
Description: Changes the password of a user account.
Example: passwd user (Changes the password for user)

These commands cover the most common tasks you’ll perform in a Linux system.
this is my file
